Create rule S6930: Backslash should be avoided in route templates (#3662)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6930/why.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/mvc/controllers/routing[Routing] in ASP.NET MVC maps https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/mvc/controllers/actions#what-is-a-controller[controllers] and https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/mvc/controllers/actions#defining-actions[actions] to paths in request https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier[URIs].

In the former syntax specification of URIs, backslash characters (`\`) were not allowed at all (see https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2396/#section-2.4.3[section "2.4.3. Excluded US-ASCII Characters" of RFC 2396]). 
While the current specification (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986[RFC 3986]) doesn't include anymore the "Excluded US-ASCII Characters" section, most URL processors still don't support backslash properly.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: I would rather keep this empty line. If we coalesce all sentences into a single paragraph, the text appears as an unreadable wall of text. The example is logically separated from the rest.

For instance, a backslash in the https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3.3["path" part] of a https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL#Syntax[URL] is automatically converted to a forward slash (`/`) both by Chrome and Internet Explorer (see https://stackoverflow.com/q/10438008[here]). 

> 
> As an example, `\Calculator\Evaluate?expression=3\4` is converted on the fly into `/Calculator/Evaluate?expression=3\4` before the HTTP request is made to the server.
> 
> While backslashes are allowed in the "query" part of a URL, and it's common to have them as part of a complex query expression, the route of a controller is always part of the "path".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, `https://example.com\Calculator\Evaluate` is converted on the fly into `https://example.com/Calculator/Evaluate` before the HTTP request is made to the server.
```

Reviewer 2: I have removed the example, but I'd rather keep that sentence. Makes things clearer in my opinion.

== Why is this an issue?

> In the former syntax specification of https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier[URIs], backslash characters (`\`) were not allowed at all (see https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2396/#section-2.4.3[section "2.4.3. Excluded US-ASCII Characters" of RFC 2396]). 

Reviewer: I would start the paragraph with a concise "Why" maybe like so:

Routes in Asp.Net MVC map to paths in request URIs. A backslash in the path portion of a URI should be avoided.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence states the issue in short and is in the description already, which serves precisely the scope of giving a short explanation for the issue.

I have added (and expanded a bit) the first sentence, which indeed was indeed missing from the Why.

> In the former syntax specification of https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier[URIs], backslash characters (`\`) were not allowed at all (see https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2396/#section-2.4.3[section "2.4.3. Excluded US-ASCII Characters" of RFC 2396]). 

Reviewer 2: If I read the RFC correctly, and also looking at [the grammar](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2396/#appendix-A), backslashes were not allowed at all, not even in the query part. That has changed in the later RFC.
I can add "not even in the query" at the end, to make the "at all" more explicit.

While the current specification (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986[RFC 3986]) doesn't include anymore the "Excluded US-ASCII Characters" section, most URL processors still don't support backslash properly.

> For instance, a backslash in the https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3.3["path" part] of a https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/URL#Syntax[URL] is automatically converted to a forward slash (`/`) both by Chrome and Internet Explorer. 

Reviewer: Do you have a reference for this? Would be useful to have a link here.

Reviewer 2: I tried myself. I have a reference on StackOverflow (https://stackoverflow.com/q/10438008), but I would not add a reference to a blog post for something that can take seconds to verify.

Reviewer: Please add it. This is much more useful than the RFC links for the average Joe. Also, you need Firefox, Chrome, Edge, and Safari to actually test this and you need older versions of the browsers as the behavior changed.

As an example, `https://localhost:7010\Calculator\Evaluate?expression=3\4` is converted on the fly into `https://localhost:7010/Calculator/Evaluate?expression=3\4` before the HTTP request is made to the server.

> While backslashes are allowed in the "query" part of a URL, and it's common to have them as part of a complex query expression, the route of a controller is always part of the "path". For example, including a query such as `?x=3\4` would make the route invalid.

Reviewer 2: Because you cannot have a query part in a route. I can make the sentence more explicit by saying `For example, including a query such as `?x=3\4` in the route template would make the route invalid.`
Is it better?

> While backslashes are allowed in the "query" part of a URL, and it's common to have them as part of a complex query expression, the route of a controller is always part of the "path". For example, including a query such as `?x=3\4` would make the route invalid.

Reviewer 2: The sentence is necessary. If the route template allowed a query to be specified, then backslashes would be valid in a route template, when they are used after `?`. 
But route templates don't allow query: they can only specificy (part of the) path. 
That is why a backslash in a route template is always wrong.

> While backslashes are allowed in the "query" part of a URL, and it's common to have them as part of a complex query expression, the route of a controller is always part of the "path". For example, including a query such as `?x=3\4` would make the route invalid.

Reviewer 2: I have removed the sentence

That is why the use of backslashes in controller templates should be avoided in general.

=== What is the potential impact?

A backslash in the route pattern of a controller would only make sense if the developer intended the backslash in the route to be explicitly escaped by the user, using https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Percent-encoding#Character_data[`%5C`].

> For example, the route `Something\[controller]` for the `HomeController` would need to be called as `Something%5CHome`.

Reviewer: It is possible, to define the route like this `[Route("Something%5CHome")]`. You may want to
* Add a compliant example in the docs and/or
* Mention it here as a compliant solution and/or
* Add an "Exceptions" section (you could add regex as another valid exception)

Reviewer 2: I tried to define that route. I could not reach it using `%5C`.
It is only reachable by double escaping, i.e. via `https://localhost:7010/Home%255CController/Index`.
I can add a test case for that, but I would not mention as an exception or anywhere else in the RSPEC, since it's something different: it doesn't map to `\`, but rather to its escaped version in URI.
Mentioning would create unnecessary confusion.

Reviewer 2: Actually I already had a Compliant test case in my test suite:
```cs
[Route("A%5C[action]")] // Compliant: URL-escaped backslash is used
```
